23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg Introducing 'open', 'shared' and 'closed' data.  This activity explains why different datasets may have different access conditions.

    Watch this 2.5 minute video (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. from the Open Data Institute titled Open/Closed/Shared: the world of data.
    Now open this page (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. to see a more in-depth view of why data is sometimes open, shared or closed.
    If you have time, go to Research Data Australia (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. and try searching for data that is 'open'. Hint: Look for the option to limit your search to data that is publicly accessible online.

Consider: why more data isn't publicly accessible or more 'open'.
23things_learnmore_XS_dark Repositories are one means by which research data may be shared.

    Take a look at this infographic from Wiley titled Research Data Sharing Insights (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. [PDF, 2.08MB] It provides a succinct overview of current data sharing practice and perceptions.
    Now look closely at the sections titled 'Global Data Sharing Trends' and 'Data Sharing By Discipline'.

Consider: Why do you think there are differences between disciplines are countries - what changes to these statistics would you expect between 2014 and now?

23things_challengeme_xs Data sharing is only a long term prospect if repositories have preservation as part of their workflows and procedures. Community Owned digital Preservation Tool Registry (COPTR) describes tools useful for long term digital preservation and acts primarily as a finding and evaluation tool to help practitioners find the tools they need to preserve digital data.

    Go to the COPTR site (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. and pick a discipline you are familiar with and see what tools are available to support long term data sharing of datasets.
    Try out one of the tools in COPTR and share a brief evaluation of it.

Consider: Have you, or would you, use any of these tools? How feasible it is to expect such preservation tools to be widely used? 
