23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg Traditional information sources such as books, photos and sculptures can easily survive for years, decades or even centuries but digital items require special care to keep them usable over time.

    Watch this 2.5 minute
    video  (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    from the US Library of Congress (LoC) which shows the vulnerability of “born digital” objects like research data: they are fragile; they are dependent on software and hardware; and they require active management.
    If you have time: look at the DASH Digital Data Preservation (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. page

Consider: What key advice would you give someone about preserving their born digital objects eg the family historian, a researcher, yourself?
23things_learnmore_xsmall_dark.png ‘Curation’, ‘preservation’, ‘archiving’ … are all commonly used data management terms.  Are they all the same thing?

    Watch this 5.54 min video (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. in which Sayeed Choudhury, Associate Dean for Research Data Management at Johns Hopkins University introduces the Stack Model for data management and discusses the model's components—storage, archiving, preservation, and curation.

Consider: What do you think about the Stack Model and its relevance for data repositories?
23things_challengeme_xs.png Data managers often refer to ‘long-lived data formats’, ‘open file formats’ and ‘format migration’. The UK National Archives has made available tools and services that can assist with identifying and managing file formats. For this activity we will look at two tools accessible via the National Archives (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. in the UK: PRONOM and DROID.

    Start by searching PRONOM (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. to learn more about a particular file format you commonly work with. Hint: Read the PRONOM Help file (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.  (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.to find out about the search options available.
    Now read the DROID (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. page and how to use DROID to profile file formats (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site..

If you have time (Not required): ask library OIT to install DROID and try using it to profile a small number of files.
Consider: Are PRONOM and DROID tools you'd like to explore further?
