Thing 1: Getting started with research data

{Getting Started} What “research data” are we talking about?

            Look over an <a href="https://www.imperial.ac.uk/research-and-innovation/support-for-staff/scholarly-communication/research-data-management/introduction-to-research-data-management/">Introduction to Research Data Management</a> from Imperial College London.
            Watch this video on research data produced by University of California Librarians (5min): <a href="https://youtu.be/Lr722k7NyGU">https://youtu.be/Lr722k7NyGU</a>.

Research data can be:

    Observational: Captured in real-time, typically outside the lab
        Examples: Sensor readings, survey results, images, audio, video
    Experimental: Typically generated in the lab or under controlled conditions
        Examples: test results, clinical trials, field experiments in international development
    Simulation: Machine generated from test models
        Examples: climate models, economic models
    Derived /Compiled: Generated from existing datasets
        Examples: text as data (data mining), compiled database, 3D models

Research data come in many formats:

    Text: field or laboratory notes, survey responses
    Numeric: tables, counts, measurements
    Audiovisual: images, sound recordings, video, models, computer code, geospatial data
    Discipline-specific: FITS in astronomy, CIF in chemistry, FASTA files in bioinformatics
    Instrument-specific: equipment outputs


    Go to one of the following links and examine the metadata page about a dataset:
        Oak Woodland Monitoring for the Irvine Open Space Easements (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. - The research data collected describes the status of mature oak trees, assesses recruitment, describes understory vegetation, and  the design of a monitoring program.
        UCI Campus Tree Inventory (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. - The project consists of GIS data collected as part of a campus-wide tree inventory, done in part to determine scope and effect of Polyphagous Shot Hole Borer (PSHB) infestation.
    Write down the specific data formats, software used, and whether the collection has a code book or data dictionary. If you aren’t familiar with the data formats or software codes, try a web search and see if you can figure out what it is. Capture your findings.
    Explore the metadata representing the collection. Besides the title and description, what other elements are described?

Use the discussion board link at the bottom of this page to share your findings.  Also, how does complexity and range of data formats affect access and re-use possibilities?

{Learn More}  Choose one of the 4 data repositories below, or find another data repository of interest - particularly one in a discipline you are unfamiliar with. Spend some time browsing around your chosen repository to get a feel for the data available.

    DASH (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    openICPSR (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    USGS Water Data (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    DataCite (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.

Think about how the data here differs from data you are familiar with.  Consider for example, format, size and access method.  Consider how cross disciplinary research could be affected by discipline data conventions, and also think about one way cross disciplinary data access can be facilitated.  Share your thoughts on the discussion board (link at bottom of this page.)

23things_challengeme_xs.png Get the ball rolling to expand awareness of the technical aspects of data management and this rapidly growing community of tech-aware data enthusiasts. What is….

    Your favorite research data tech, software story or experience?
    A software tool or service for research data you think others might be interested in?
    A question or research data problem to crowd source a solution?

Conduct a personal audit on what data technical skills you have, and what skills you want to learn.  Share your thoughts on the discussion board (link at bottom of this page.)
