23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg Artists think about data differently!

When we typically think about data, what do we imagine? Usually, the first thing that comes to us is that it's facts and statistics collected together for reference or analysis. Artists think about data differently though - for them, research data may take the forms of sketchbooks, log books, sets of images, video recordings, trials, prototypes, ceramic glaze recipes, found objects, and correspondence. Explore one of the resources below:

    Shakespeare’s staging (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. - presenting pictures, videos, information, etc. about how Shakespeare's plays have been produced over the centuries
    Linked Jazz (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. - a research project attempting to visualize relationships amongst musicians in the jazz community
    Siobhan Davies Dance Archive (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. - an online archive of not only the end product (performance videos), but also many of the production notes, rehearsal pictures, etc. that help contextualize the end performances

Think about how data in the arts differs from the data you are familiar with. Discuss the similarities and differences.
23things_learnmore_xsmall_dark.png How do librarians and curators discuss data in the arts?

Data in the Arts is an emerging area of discussion since it is viewed quite differently from quantitative data. Artists may not follow the traditional data life cycle that we are familiar with. Another existent issue is that there isn't necessarily a definition of what "research data" is for the creative arts.

Read one of the following articles:

    Research data in the creative and performing arts (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. by Daniela Duca
    Data Curation and the Arts: How do musicians curate their data? (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. by Amy Jackson, Jonathan Wheeles & Todd Quinn
    Data Services and the Performing Arts (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. by Amy S. Jackson, Jonathan Wheeler & Todd Quinn
    Pinning It Down: Towards a Practical Definition of ‘Research Data’ for Creative Arts Institutions (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. by Marieke Guy, Martin Donnelly, Laura Molloy

Did the article you choose help you better understand research data in the creative arts or did it leave you with more questions? 

23things_challengeme_xs.png Data as Art!

There are instances of artistic works that use scientific data sets as the inspiration. Data can be manipulated by computer programs to generate music and visualizations. Take a look at one of the following examples:

    SOLARBEAT | Ambient generative Solar System music box (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. by WhiteVinyl
    Drawing Water (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. by David Wicks
    Map of Scientific Collaborations (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. by Olivier H. Beauchesne

It's important to note that most artists won't use the word "data" to describe what they work with. Instead, they may use words "research", "inspiration", "influence", "spark", etc.

When performing a data interview, would you talk to an artist differently than you would to a biologist? How would you change your approach? What do you think you still need to know in order to discuss data comfortably with an artist?

Picture1.jpg Thing 23: Data in the arts Discussion
Special thanks to Scott Stone and Emilee Mathews who provided a lot of the examples and answered all my questions about Arts and Data!
