23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg  Data often have a longer lifespan than the research project that creates them. Follow-up projects may analyze or add to the data, and data may be reused by other researchers.  Journal publishers are increasingly mandating that the data underpinning a journal article be retained and made accessible for the long term.A data life cycle shows the different phases a data set goes through as the research project moves from "having a brilliant idea" to "making ground breaking discoveries" to "telling the world about it."

    Take a look at the UK Data Archive Research Data Lifecycle  (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    Click on each of the pink circles to see what happens with data at each stage of the life cycle.
    How does this mesh with your understanding of the research lifecycle?

23things_learnmore_small  Research Lifecycle Models provide a high-level overview of the stages and actions during the research lifecycle required for successful management of data.

    Take a look at the DCC Curation Lifecycle Model (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. which concentrates on preservation and curation within data management.
    What modification or addition would you include to make this model contextualized to your situation?

23things_challengeme_small  Data management is likely to be the most effective when it is integrated into existing system-wide research and administrative processes. New software and products are being developed particularly with this in mind.

    Scan through this guide to Research Data Management in Practice (PDF, 0.74 MB) (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site..
    Look carefully at Figure 1 Key Steps in Research Data Management, Section 3: Steps in Research Data Management.
    What are the emerging opportunities for institutions to integrate management systems for their research data assets?

Picture1.jpg Thing 3: Data in the Research Lifecycle Discussion 
