Please let us know what level your post is addressing, i.e. Getting Started, Learn More, or Challenge Me.

Getting Started:

    Open up one of these collections:
        Oak Woodland Monitoring for the Irvine Open Space Easements (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. - The research data collected describes the status of mature oak trees, assesses recruitment, describes understory vegetation, and  the design of a monitoring program.
        UCI Campus Tree Inventory (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. - The project consists of GIS data collected as part of a campus-wide tree inventory, done in part to determine scope and effect of Polyphagous Shot Hole Borer (PSHB) infestation.
    Write down the specific data formats, software used, and whether the collection has a code book or data dictionary. If you aren’t familiar with the data formats or software codes, try a web search and see if you can figure out what it is. Capture your findings.
    Explore the metadata representing the collection. Besides the title and description, what other elements are described?
    Also, how does complexity and range of data formats affect access and re-use possibilities?
    Note: You do not need to download the data associated with these files, instead review the records to see if you can answer the questions above.

Learn More:

    Research data comes in a variety of forms and in order to effectively use data researchers must include appropriate supporting materials.  For this exercise use one of the following data sources:
        DASHLinks to an external site.
        openICPSLinks to an external site.
        USGS Water DataLinks to an external site.
        DataCiteLinks to an external site.
        A dataset that you have produced in the course of your own research.
        Another research dataset available online through a data repository of your choice.
    Think about how the data here differs from data you are familiar with. Consider for example, format, size and access method.
    Record your reflections and please provide the name and a link to the dataset you chose.

Challenge Me:

    Answer one of the following questions:
        Your favorite research data tech, software story or experience?
        A software tool or service for research data you think others might be interested in?
        A question or research data problem to crowd source a solution?
        Conduct a personal audit on what data technical skills you have, and what skills you want to learn.
