
23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg Consider this scenario: You’ve assisted a student, faculty, or staff member in finding a dataset. You’ve downloaded it. Excellent! But do you know what can and cannot be done with the data? The answer lies in data licensing. Licensing is critical to enabling data to be reused and cited.

    Start by reading this introduction (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. to licensing research data.
    Now have a closer look at the poster (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. from creativecommons.org. Click on the descriptions for more information. Notice they have used CC BY as the licensing information at the bottom of the poster so you know what you can do with the poster itself.

Consider: If you were considering licensing a data set on something which may have commercial value to others - what license would you apply?
 23things_learnmore_xsmall_dark.png  Enabling reuse of data can speed up research and innovation.  Licensing is critical to enabling data reuse.

Start by watching this 7.01 mins animation providing information about Open Data Licensing by OERIPR Support
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Tvwp5LK_Wko (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
Consider: Does your institution have a policy or guidelines around data licensing, if doesn't, should it?

23things_challengeme_xs.png  Not all research data that is shared is licensed for reuse. It should be!

    Start by going to Research Data Australia (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. and search for research data using keywords eg. ‘water quality’ or ‘cancer’.  Note the number of records in your result set.
    Now “Refine Results” to limit your search to only those datasets with an ‘open’ licence.  Note the number of records in this result set.
    Look closely at the specific Licensing information on a small sample of those records with ‘open’ licenses. How easy or difficult it is to work out if the data can or can’t be reused e.g. for commercial purposes? with international collaborators?

Consider: Assigning Open Licenses is not routine. Suggest one tip for encouraging uptake of 'open' licensing.
