

23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) are unique identifiers that provide persistent access to published articles, datasets, software versions and a range of other research inputs and outputs. There are over 120million Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) in use, and last year DOIs were “resolved” (clicked on) over 5 billion times!

Each DOI is unique but a typical DOI looks like this: http://doi.org/10.4225/08/50F62E0D359D5

DOIs can be used to collect citation metrics about the use of a dataset or article.

        Start by watching this short 4.5min video
        Persistent Identifiers and Data Citation Explained (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
        from the Netherlands. It gives you a succinct, clear explanation of how DOIs underpin data citation.
        Have a look at the poster below (opens to an A4 size) - follow the arrows to see how DOIs are attached to data sets.
        data citation poster
        Let’s go to a CSIRO data record which shows how DOIs are used. Click on this DOI to ‘resolve’ the DOI and take us to the record: http://doi.org/10.4225/08/50F62E0D359D5 (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site..
        Click on both the Description and Data tabs and note how many times the DOI is used in this data record.  It will give you some ideas why DOIs are given such prominence.
        This same record (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. has been syndicated to Research Data Australia.  Click on the Cite icon on the upper left of the record (under the green Go To Data Provider tab).  Now click on the DOI in the data citation.  No matter where the DOI appears it always resolves back to its original dataset record to avoid duplication. I.e. many records, one copy.
        DOIs can also be applied to grey literature, such as reports like the Haefliger’s cottage investigation with this DOI http://dx.doi.org/10.4227/11/50459F7BD4D0B (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. in the NEW Archaeology Online: Grey Literature Archive

Metrics such as Times Viewed, Times Accessed and Times Downloaded are commonly known as ‘Altmetrics’.  Altmetrics are explored in Thing 8 Learn More.

What’s your opinion?

Here’s a controversial question to consider: should DOIs be routinely applied to all research outputs? Remember that DOIs carry an expectation of persistence (maintenance costs, etc) but can provide be used to collect metrics as well as  link articles and data (evidence of impact.)

23things_learnmore_xsmall_dark.png Alternative metrics or altmetrics count the number of views, number of downloads, social media "likes" and recommendations associated with a dataset. Because of their immediacy, altmetrics can be an early indicator of the impact or reach of a dataset; long before formal citation metrics can be assessed.

    Start by looking at the almetrics for this Phylogenomics article (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. published in Science.   Note the number and pattern of downloads for this article since it was published in November 2014.
    Now click on the “donut” or the link to ‘More Details’ to see the wealth of information available.
    Look also at the associated data in Dryad (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. noting that the data has been assigned a DOI.  Can you see how many times the data has been downloaded and the record viewed (scroll down to the bottom of the record)?

By way of comparison, as of early June 2017:

    The same dataset had been cited once in Thomson Reuters Data Citation Index
    The article had been cited 404 times in Web of Science

Consider: Do you think altmetrics for data have value in academic settings?  Why, or why not?

23things_challengeme_xs.png The EZID service provided by CDL makes it easy to create and manage long-term, globally unique identifiers for data and sources, ensuring their future discoverability. EZID can be used to:

    Create identifiers for anything: texts, data, bones, terms, etc.
    Manage research objects more easily with shareable, unbreakable links
    Store citation information for the objects in a variety of formats
    Fit identifiers into automated workflows with the standards-based API

What is a long-term identifier?

An identifier is an association between a character string and an object. Objects can be files, parts of files, names of persons or organizations, abstractions, etc. Objects can be online or offline. Character strings include URLs, serial numbers, names, addresses, etc. A "persistent identifier" is an identifier that is available and managed over time; it will not change if the item is moved or renamed. This means that an item can be reliably referenced for future access by humans and software. EZID currently supports persistence for two kinds of identifiers: DataCite Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) and lower-cost Archival Resource Keys (ARKs).
What is a DOI?

DOI stands for "Digital Object Identifier." It is an identifier originating from the publishing world and in widespread use for journal articles. DOIs become persistent when the objects and identifier forwarding information are maintained.
What is an ARK?

ARK stands for "Archival Resource Key." It is an identifier originating from the library, archive and museum community. ARKs become persistent when the objects and identifier forwarding information are maintained.

Create a simple demo identifier: https://ezid.cdlib.org/demo/simple

Consider: How easy was it to create the demo identifier? What do you think are the critical issues to ensure the persistence of DOIs over a number of years?
