

23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg Metadata is your best data friend!  Metadata is structured information about a resource that describes characteristics such as content, quality, format, location and contact information.  Creating metadata to describe research data is very similar to the process for descriptive cataloguing of library resources.

Metadata schema are sets of metadata elements (or fields) for describing a particular type of information resource.  Numerous metadata schema exist for describing research data across different disciplines. Probably our most familiar metadata schema are those commonly used in library catalogues and publications repositories such as MARC and Dublin Core.

    Start by reading Chapter 2: Setting the Stage in Introduction to Metadata (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. by Anne J. Gilliland to understand what metadata is and why is it the lifeblood of research data sharing!
    Now look closely at this good quality metadata record for research data:  (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.Long-term variation of surface phytoplankton chlorophyll a in the Southern Ocean during 1965-2002 (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.

Why do you think this record is considered ‘high quality’?  Hint: consider both the type and quality of information provided. What metadata included in this record help discovery and reuse of the data?  Look back at the Introduction to Metadata for ideas and think about what we’ve looked at in previous Things such as licensing and sensitive data.

3. If you have time: Sadly, it’s not hard to find examples of low quality metadata describing research data. Read this short 2 page article Avoiding Data Dumpsters - Toward Equitable and Useful Data Sharing (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. on the power of good quality, schema-compliant metadata (N Engl J Med. 2016 May 11.)

Consider: Why, if metadata is the lifeblood of data discover-ability and reuse, is it often neglected or not richly done when data is published?

23things_learnmore_xsmall_dark.png A metadata standard is a schema that has been formally approved and published, with governance procedures in place to maintain and update the standard.  Examples include ANZLIC and DDI (Document, Discover and Interoperate).

Numerous metadata standards exist and the standard chosen to describe resources such as research data should be appropriate to the project or discipline.

    Start by reading this short guide to Evaluating and Selecting a metadata standard (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. Keep this Guide open.
    Choose one disciplinary standard which sparks your interest from the UK Digital Curation Centre’s Directory of Disciplinary Metadata (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. Use the Guide to critique your chosen standard.

Consider: The particular standard you explored in detail and perhaps add other reasons to recommend (or not) that standard.

23things_challengeme_xs.png Hands on with XML!

No software installation required.

XML is the language most commonly used for machine to machine transfer of metadata. An understanding of XML is valuable for anyone working ‘under the hood’ with metadata: for example, harvesting or crosswalking metadata.

For this activity we will use Dublin Core. It is a well used metadata standard across domains and resource types and it forms the basis of many other metadata standards. Let's get started!

1. Start by creating a ‘simple’ metadata record in Dublin Core using the free Dublin Core Generator online (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. tool. Provide some content for at least the first 5 of the 15 Dublin Core elements - you can either make up the metadata or reuse metadata from a record in DASH.  Once you’ve created the metadata record:

    Check all the output options
    Display the output as XML and
    Save it (the default is .txt file).

2. Upload your saved file into this online XML editor (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. noting the tree display on the right hand side. Spend a few moments checking out the features of this tool before manually editing your XML to change the author name,  add  a subject term and add a few other metadata elements.

3. Now download the edited file and save it. Does the edited XML appear as you expected?

Reflect on XML as a metadata tool. The metadata creation tools we have explored in Thing 11 - what needs to happen for these tools to have much wider uptake?
