23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg In Thing 8 we learned about DOIs as persistent identifiers for data, as well as their role in supporting data citation.

What about identifiers for people?  Think about the many forms a person’s name may take or common names. Is the author JK Rowling the same person as Joanne Rowling and Jo Rowling?  More than 38,000 Americans have the name James Smith!

It’s important to know who’s who when looking at citation metrics as discussed in Thing 7. Universities, funders and publishers worldwide now use ORCID to differentiate between people with the same name by assigning individuals with a unique identifier.

1. Let’s start by going to ORCID (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. In the search box at the very top of the page, enter John David Burton to search the ORCID registry. Scan the list of results to find the entry for John David Burton.  How many versions of his name do you see?

2. Now enter Toby Burrows into the search box.

    Open his ORCID record (1st link) to see a wonderful example of a rich ORCID record.
    Note he has combined his ResearcherID and his Scopus Author ID with his ORCID.
    Scroll through his list of works and look closely at Source to see the wide range of sources of his publications.  Are any datasets included?  (Hint: look for Source:  Australian National Data Service (ANDS) Registry but note the publication type for research data!)

23things_learnmore_small ORCID has recently emerged as the preferred identifier for people by a range of universities, funders and publishers worldwide.  You can choose from 3 activities that will get you in touch with ORCID.

Option 1. Don’t have an ORCID record but would like one?

Use this time to create an ORCID profile and make it as complete as possible.

    Start here (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. and do steps 1 and 2.
    When you’re done, add your ORCID to your email signature, LinkedIn profile and blog
    Send your new ORCID number to a colleague and ask for some feedback on your profile

Option 2. Already have an ORCID?

When was the last time you logged in to update or enhance your profile? You may be surprised at the additional functionality now available.

    Read Alice Meadow’s blog post (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. ‘Six Things to do now you have an ORCID iD’
    Now go to your ORCID profile and update it to be as current and complete as possible
    When you’re done, add your ORCID to your email signature, LinkedIn profile and blog
    Consider using the new QR code feature (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. for your ORCID iD in new and unchartered ways

Option 3. Don’t want an ORCID?

Get up to date with the latest features, functionality and news on the ORCID blog (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site..

23things_challengeme_small Identifiers are an important component of research data management. Computer applications use them for identifying datasets, for searching and retrieval, and for linking or connecting data.  In Thing 8 we looked at Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs) for identifying data.  In the Getting started and Learn more activities of Thing 14 we focussed on ORCIDs for identifying people. So, how do identifiers fit with Linked Data?

The term Linked Data refers to a set of best practices for publishing and connecting structured data on the Web.  Identifiers are an important component of Linked Data as URIs (or Universal Resource Identifiers), along with HTTP and RDF (Resource Description Framework) are the key technologies that underpin Linked Data. What is Linked Data and the Semantic Web and what is all the hype about?

1. Start by reading an introduction to these concepts from LinkedDataTools (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site..

2. Have a go at completing some or all of the 5 short (5 min) Semantic Web Primer tutorials:

    Introducing Graph Data
    Introducing RDF
    Semantic Modeling
    Introducing RDFS & OWL
    Querying Semantic Data

If you have time:  Try out the free online RDF data validator in Tutorial 4: Introducing RDFS & OWL to describe research objects.
