23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg We all have a role to play in building a world of data literate citizens.

    Enjoy this quirky and clever 1.48-min video from a cartoonist:
    What is data literacy (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
     
    Choose one of the sites from the list below. As you look around the site, think about how you might use these ideas to "grow" your, or other people’s, data literacy:
        For Universities and research institutes: Curtin University (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. 
        For Federal, State or Local Govt: Publishing your data from US data.gov (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
        For Business: Open data that drives business  (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. (UK, 2015) or US data.gov Business section (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
        For teachers and school librarians: Resources for educators (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. to find data repositories which have teaching materials
        For lecturers: 9 case studies (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. (page 13-17) of how research data is used in various curricula from Teaching with Research Data: Report to the Australian National Data Service (ANDS), August 2015
        For librarians: A list of 10 recommendations (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. from LIBER for libraries to get started with research data management

23things_learnmore_small People have very diverse needs in terms of what data literacy means for them.

Choose one or two from the list below and explore “data literacy” from the perspectives of these diverse roles:

    Librarians: What is Data Literacy? (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. (from databrarians.org)
    Entrepreneurs: Data Literacy -- What It Is And Why None of Us Have It (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. (from Forbes Magazine)
    Political science students: Data Literacy and Data Visualization (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. - Lecture 1: Introduction (note: you need iTunes)
    Writers, journalists: Become Data Literate in 3 Simple Steps (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    Teachers and high school students:
    Data Literacy is Essential to Modern Society (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
     (Video 3.51mins, published 2016 by MIT Industrial Liaison Program)
    Citizens: Open data for accountable governance: Is data literacy the key to citizen engagement? (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.

23things_challengeme_xs.png Technical data wrangling skills are fast becoming a new form of data literacy.  The four Carpentry concepts listed below have really taken off over the past couple of years.

The “one hour a week” model for 23 Things doesn’t allow enough time to do any of the Carpentry modules since most of them need at least several hours to complete, but here’s a chance for you to find out what all the Carpentry buzz is about.

Have a look at this Environmental scan (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. of courses offering data skills. Then choose one Carpentry to explore in depth or browse over them all:

    Data Carpentry (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    Library Carpentry (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    Software Carpentry (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    Author Carpentry (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.

We will get more hands-on with Carpentry in Thing 21.
