23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg Two choices for Getting Started!

Two exciting things are happening with data and journal publishers: 1) More and more journal publishers are asking authors to make the data underpinning a journal article available. 2) New forms of data publishing are emerging - data journals.

publishers with data policies

It’s all about ensuring that the research being described in the article is based on solid, reproducible science. Thinking back to Thing 5: Data Sharing, remember that available can be “open” or “shared” through mediated access.
Choice 1: Journal Data Policies

More and more publishers are suggesting, asking, and even mandating that underpinning data be available to support journal articles. Choose one of the links below to explore some of these policies:

    PLOS One data policy (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    Dryad (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. data repository: Look up a journal you know and see what the advice the journal gives on data submission and embargo, etc.

Choice 2: Data journals

Explore a new form of data publishing: the data journal. Data journals focus on data rather than discuss an analysis of the data (as in traditional journals).

    Read this short introduction: What are data journals? (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.
    Browse this data paper (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. on how and why the Chinese population has been on the move in the past 70 years, recently published in Nature’s data journal Scientific Data: 
        Note the extensive exposure of the data through maps, links to full tables and diagrams, etc., and how to cite this article.
        Clicking on the DOI under Data Citations will take you to the actual data described in the article.

23things_learnmore_small What are publishers and funders saying about data?

In July 2016, the global journal publishers Springer announced a new, company wide set of standardized research data policies consisting of four levels of data sharing. These policies have been adopted by over 350 journals already:

    Start reading this blog post Promoting research data sharing at Springer Nature (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. about the 4 levels of research data sharing policies.
    Spend a bit of time clicking the links near the bottom of the post: FAQs, policies in full, list of trusted data repositories, preparing Data Availability Statements (which are increasingly required as part of funder policies).

23things_challengeme_xs.pngThe National Science Foundation (NSF) funded more than $7,124 million in 2016 for research and education programs, 76% of which went to colleges, universities, and academic consortia.  Take a look at the National Science Foundation (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. and note the DMP requirement.

    Choose one of these major funders of research in other countries and have a look at their data sharing policies.
        NHMRC Statement on Data Sharing (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. - note the lifecycle diagram for data sharing. 
        Wellcome Trust (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. (U.K.)
