23things_gettingstarted_big.jpg Thing 18 offers a simple way to think about key messages and possible responses that can be used to quickly and succinctly pitch research data management to researchers.

    Start by scrolling to the very last link on the bottom of this page (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.: either open the PDF or download the Word version of the "What’s my pitch?" document.
    Fill in the gaps in the document based on our libraries data services. If you don’t know the answers to some, see if you can find out. The result will be your own version of the toolkit.

 23things_learnmore_small 

Option 1: Interviews to collect metadata

Imagine you are to gather information to complete a metadata record for either data which will be created as a result of a project or for existing data at the end of a project where the data must be published now:

    Work through the steps in the Interviewing Researchers toolkit (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. from Monash University.

Option 2: Interviews which explore data management practice

The Data Curation Profiles Toolkit, developed by Purdue University, is meant to help launch discussions between librarians, archivists, IT professionals, data managers, researchers, and others in order to aid the planning of data services that directly address the needs of researchers:

    Start with an overview of the Data Curation Profiles Toolkit (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site..
    Have a look at the description of one of the most popular Data Curation Profiles which has been downloaded over 700 times: History / Sustainable Development - Purdue University (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. Note the citation and DOI for this Profile.
    Click on the Download button to see the actual questions asked/discussed and the answers. It is fascinating to see the strengths and gaps in the data management skills of the researcher.

If you have time: Browse over the four documents which make up the Data Curation Profiles Toolkit (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. Together, they provide a step-by-step guide for creating a Data Curation Profile like the one you have just looked at.

23things_challengeme_small A "Data Curation Profile" is a resource for people who want information about the specific data generated and used in research areas and how that may be published, shared, and preserved for reuse. Research projects increasingly use a range of tools, instruments, and software. The activity of creating a Data Profile considers what questions you would need to ask and what options you could offer to help researchers provide and include information about tools, software, etc. in a metadata record or a website to facilitate data reuse.

Note: if you aren’t familiar with the Data Curation Profile tools, you may wish to skim over the activity in 23things_learnmore_small before you start this one.

Option 1: Geophysics and Seismology / Structural Geology and Neotectonics

This Data Curation Profile (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site. covers a data set generated from research on plate tectonics. The data management needs center around data sharing, connecting the data to publications, and making the data discoverable:

    Go to Section 3.2 (page 4) and Section 9 - Tools (page 8-9).
    Note the information at the end of Section 9: it is information to potential users about what computing will be needed to be able to investigate or reuse this data.

Option 2: Sociology / Demographics

Review Section 9 (page 5) of this Data Curation Profile (Links to an external site.)Links to an external site.. Specifically, it states that:

“If this data were hosted in an external data repository, it would be a high priority to be able to continue to use visualization tools such as Google Maps and Google Charts. The ability to annotate or comment on the data set was a lesser (medium) priority; possible uses would include knowing when a user reports that more recent data is available elsewhere."
